docs/debugger/README.md, before:

---
layout: section-summary
title: Debugger
category: debugger
tags: [debugger, repl, readme]
order: 0
---

# Enso Debugger

The Enso Debugger allows amongst other things, to execute arbitrary expressions
in a given execution context - this is used to implement a debugging REPL. The
REPL can be launched when triggering a breakpoint in the code.

This folder contains all documentation pertaining to the REPL and the debugger,
which is broken up as follows:

- [**The Enso Debugger Protocol:**](./protocol.md) The protocol for the Debugger

# Chrome Developer Tools Debugger

As a well written citizen of the [GraalVM](http://graalvm.org) project the Enso
language can be used with existing tools available for the overall platform. One
of them is
[Chrome Debugger](https://www.graalvm.org/22.1/tools/chrome-debugger/) and Enso
language is fully integrated with it. Launch the `bin/enso` executable with
additional `--inspect` option and debug your Enso programs in _Chrome Developer
Tools_.

```bash
enso$ ./built-distribution/enso-engine-*/enso-*/bin/enso --inspect --run ./test/Tests/src/Data/Numbers_Spec.enso
Debugger listening on ws://127.0.0.1:9229/Wugyrg9
For help, see: https://www.graalvm.org/tools/chrome-debugger
E.g. in Chrome open: devtools://devtools/bundled/js_app.html?ws=127.0.0.1:9229/Wugyrg9
```

copy the printed URL into chrome browser and you should see:

![Chrome Debugger](chrome-debugger.png)

Step in, step over, set breakpoints, watch values of your variables as execution
of your Enso program progresses.

# Debugging Enso and Java Code at Once

Enso libraries are written in a mixture of Enso code and Java libraries.
Debugging both sides (the Java as well as Enso code) is possible with a decent
IDE.

Get [NetBeans](http://netbeans.apache.org) version 13 or newer or
[VS Code with Apache Language Server extension](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/NETBEANS/Apache+NetBeans+Extension+for+Visual+Studio+Code)
and just pass in special JVM arguments when launching the `bin/enso` launcher:

```bash
enso$ JAVA_OPTS=-agentlib:jdwp=transport=dt_socket,server=y,address=8000 ./built-distribution/enso-engine-*/enso-*/bin/enso --run ./test/Tests/src/Data/Numbers_Spec.enso
Listening for transport dt_socket at address: 8000
```

and then _Debug/Attach Debugger_. Once connected suspend the execution and (if
the Enso language has already been started) choose the _Toggle Pause in GraalVM
Script_ button in the toolbar:

![NetBeans Debugger](java-debugger.png)

and your execution shall stop on the next `.enso` line of code. This mode allows
to debug both - the Enso code as well as Java code. The stack traces shows a
mixture of Java and Enso stack frames by default. Right-clicking on the thread
allows one to switch to plain Java view (with a way more stack frames) and back.
Analyzing low level details as well as Enso developer point of view shall be
simple with such tool.

Commit message:

Allow arbitrary expression evaluation in chromeinspector (#3941)
Allow arbitrary expression evaluation in the chromeinspector console. Moreover, allow modifications of any variable in any stack frame.

# Important Notes
- Implement inline parsing in `EnsoLanguage.parse(InlineParsingRequest)`.
- Debugging experience is affected by this [bug in Truffle](https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/5513), which causes NPEs when a host object gets into chromeinspector. I tried to implement a workaround, but it does not work all the time. Nevertheless, it should not matter that much - if there is a NPE in the debugger, you can just ignore it, as it should be concealed in the debugger and should not be propagted outside. See comments in the `docs/debugger`.

docs/debugger/README.md, after:

---
layout: section-summary
title: Debugger
category: debugger
tags: [debugger, repl, readme]
order: 0
---

# Enso Debugger

The Enso Debugger allows amongst other things, to execute arbitrary expressions
in a given execution context - this is used to implement a debugging REPL. The
REPL can be launched when triggering a breakpoint in the code.

This folder contains all documentation pertaining to the REPL and the debugger,
which is broken up as follows:

- [**The Enso Debugger Protocol:**](./protocol.md) The protocol for the Debugger

# Chrome Developer Tools Debugger

As a well written citizen of the [GraalVM](http://graalvm.org) project the Enso
language can be used with existing tools available for the overall platform. One
of them is
[Chrome Debugger](https://www.graalvm.org/22.1/tools/chrome-debugger/) and Enso
language is fully integrated with it. Launch the `bin/enso` executable with
additional `--inspect` option and debug your Enso programs in _Chrome Developer
Tools_.

```bash
enso$ ./built-distribution/enso-engine-*/enso-*/bin/enso --inspect --run ./test/Tests/src/Data/Numbers_Spec.enso
Debugger listening on ws://127.0.0.1:9229/Wugyrg9
For help, see: https://www.graalvm.org/tools/chrome-debugger
E.g. in Chrome open: devtools://devtools/bundled/js_app.html?ws=127.0.0.1:9229/Wugyrg9
```

copy the printed URL into chrome browser and you should see:

![Chrome Debugger](chrome-debugger.png)

Step in, step over, set breakpoints, watch values of the variables as well as
evaluate arbitrary expressions in the console. Note that as of December 2022,
with GraalVM 22.3.0, there is a well-known
[bug in Truffle](https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/5513) that causes
`NullPointerException` when a host object gets into the chrome inspector. There
is a workaround for that, but it may not work in certain situations. Therefore,
if you encounter `NullPointerException` thrown from

```
at org.graalvm.truffle/com.oracle.truffle.polyglot.PolyglotContextImpl.getContext(PolyglotContextImpl.java:685)
```

simply ignore it. It will be handled within the debugger and should not affect
the rest of the environment.

# Debugging Enso and Java Code at Once

Enso libraries are written in a mixture of Enso code and Java libraries.
Debugging both sides (the Java as well as Enso code) is possible with a decent
IDE.

Get [NetBeans](http://netbeans.apache.org) version 13 or newer or
[VS Code with Apache Language Server extension](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/NETBEANS/Apache+NetBeans+Extension+for+Visual+Studio+Code)
and just pass in special JVM arguments when launching the `bin/enso` launcher:

```bash
enso$ JAVA_OPTS=-agentlib:jdwp=transport=dt_socket,server=y,address=8000 ./built-distribution/enso-engine-*/enso-*/bin/enso --run ./test/Tests/src/Data/Numbers_Spec.enso
Listening for transport dt_socket at address: 8000
```

and then _Debug/Attach Debugger_. Once connected suspend the execution and (if
the Enso language has already been started) choose the _Toggle Pause in GraalVM
Script_ button in the toolbar:

![NetBeans Debugger](java-debugger.png)

and your execution shall stop on the next `.enso` line of code. This mode allows
to debug both - the Enso code as well as Java code. The stack traces shows a
mixture of Java and Enso stack frames by default. Right-clicking on the thread
allows one to switch to plain Java view (with a way more stack frames) and back.
Analyzing low level details as well as Enso developer point of view shall be
simple with such tool.
