docs/distribution/README.md, before:

---
layout: section-summary
title: Enso Distribution
category: distribution
tags: [distribution, readme]
order: 0
---

# Enso Distribution

Documents in this section deal with the process of packaging both Enso and its
dependencies, and Enso projects for use by our users.

- [**Distribution:**](./distribution.md) Information on how we distribute Enso
  to our users, and for use by the [IDE](https://github.com/enso-org/ide).
- [**Packaging:**](./packaging.md) Information on the structure of an Enso
  project/package.
- [**Release Policy:**](./release-policy.md) Information on the release policy
  for Enso and this repository.
- [**Launcher:**](./launcher.md) Information on the design of Enso launcher, the
  tool for launching various components and managing Enso versions.
- [**Launcher CLI:**](./launcher-cli.md) Explanation of the command-line
  interface of the launcher.
- [**Licenses:**](licenses.md) Information on gathering license information of
  dependencies included in the distribution.
- [**Fallback Launcher Release Infrastructure:**](fallback-launcher-release-infrastructure.md)
  Explanation of the fallback infrastructure that can be enabled to keep
  launcher updates functioning even if the primary release provider stops
  working.
- [**Local Repository:**](local-repository.md) Explanation of local repository
  structure that is used for bundling engine with project manager distributions.
- [**Standard Libraries:**](standard-libraries.md) A brief explanation of the
  standard libraries for Enso.

Commit message:

Better component handling in the project manager (#1399)

docs/distribution/README.md, after:

---
layout: section-summary
title: Enso Distribution
category: distribution
tags: [distribution, readme]
order: 0
---

# Enso Distribution

Documents in this section deal with the process of packaging both Enso and its
dependencies, and Enso projects for use by our users.

- [**Distribution:**](./distribution.md) Information on how we distribute Enso
  to our users, and for use by the [IDE](https://github.com/enso-org/ide).
- [**Packaging:**](./packaging.md) Information on the structure of an Enso
  project/package.
- [**Release Policy:**](./release-policy.md) Information on the release policy
  for Enso and this repository.
- [**Launcher:**](./launcher.md) Information on the design of Enso launcher, the
  tool for launching various components and managing Enso versions.
- [**Launcher CLI:**](./launcher-cli.md) Explanation of the command-line
  interface of the launcher.
- [**Licenses:**](licenses.md) Information on gathering license information of
  dependencies included in the distribution.
- [**Fallback Launcher Release Infrastructure:**](fallback-launcher-release-infrastructure.md)
  Explanation of the fallback infrastructure that can be enabled to keep
  launcher updates functioning even if the primary release provider stops
  working.
- [**Standard Libraries:**](standard-libraries.md) A brief explanation of the
  standard libraries for Enso.
- [**Bundles**](bundles.md) An explanation of distributed bundles that contain
  all components necessary to run Enso out of the box.
