docs/README.md, before:

---
layout: docs-index
title: Enso Engine Developer Documentation
category: summary
tags: [summary, readme]
order: 0
---

# Enso Engine Developer Documentation

This folder contains the documentation for the implementation of the Enso
programming language. The documentation is broken up by subject, within the
below-listed categories, and each subject combines information about the design,
specification, and implementation of the feature to which it pertains.

We provide a number of useful resources for getting a quick understanding of the
Enso project:

- [**The Enso Philosophy:**](./enso-philosophy.md) Information on the design
  philosophy behind Enso, and why we build things in the way we do.
- [**Contributing Guidelines:**](./CONTRIBUTING.md) Information for people
  wanting to contribute to Enso (in many different ways).
- [**Community Code of Conduct:**](./CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) The code of conduct for
  members of our community, developers and users alike.
- [**Security Guidelines:**](./SECURITY.md) Security guidelines for the Enso
  project, including supported versions and our vulnerability reporting process.
- [**Getting Enso:**](./getting-enso.md) Instructions for how to get and run a
  copy of Enso.

It is broken up into categories as follows:

- [**Distribution:**](./distribution) Information on how we distribute Enso to
  our users, and how Enso packages themselves work.
- [**Language Server:**](./language-server) Information on the Enso language
  server, its protocol, and how it integrates with the runtime.
- [**Polyglot:**](./polyglot) Information on Enso's polyglot functionality, and
  how it is integrated into the surface Enso language.
- [**RFCs:**](./rfcs) RFCs for Enso's development and evolution.
- [**Runtime:**](./runtime) Specification and documentation of the way that the
  Enso runtime is designed and implemented.
- [**Semantics:**](./semantics) A specification of Enso's semantics.
- [**Style Guides:**](./style-guide) Style guides for the code written as part
  of the Enso project.
- [**Syntax:**](./syntax) A specification of Enso's syntax.
- [**Types:**](./types) A specification of Enso's type system and type theory.
- [**Debugger:**](./debugger) A specification of Enso's debugger.
- [**Parser:**](./parser) Design and specification of the Enso parser.
- [**Infrastructure:**](./infrastructure) Description of the infrastructure for
  building Enso.
- [**Libraries:**](./libraries) Description of Enso's Library Ecosystem.

Commit message:

Update some documentation for clarity (#2005)

docs/README.md, after:

---
layout: docs-index
title: Enso Engine Developer Documentation
category: summary
tags: [summary, readme]
order: 0
---

# Enso Engine Developer Documentation

This folder contains the documentation for the implementation of the Enso
programming language. The documentation is broken up by subject, within the
below-listed categories, and each subject combines information about the design,
specification, and implementation of the feature to which it pertains.

We provide a number of useful resources for getting a quick understanding of the
Enso project:

- [**The Enso Philosophy:**](./enso-philosophy.md) Information on the design
  philosophy behind Enso, and why we build things in the way we do.
- [**Contributing Guidelines:**](./CONTRIBUTING.md) Information for people
  wanting to contribute to Enso (in many different ways).
- [**Community Code of Conduct:**](./CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) The code of conduct for
  members of our community, developers and users alike.
- [**Security Guidelines:**](./SECURITY.md) Security guidelines for the Enso
  project, including supported versions and our vulnerability reporting process.
- [**Getting Enso:**](./getting-enso.md) Instructions for how to get and run a
  copy of Enso.
- [**Runtime Roadmap:**](./runtime-roadmap.md) An analysis of the pressing
  changes that should be made to the runtime.
- [**Runtime Guide:**](./runtime-guide.md) A tour of the runtime, and some
  pointers as to useful resources.

It is broken up into categories as follows:

- [**Distribution:**](./distribution) Information on how we distribute Enso to
  our users, and how Enso packages themselves work.
- [**Language Server:**](./language-server) Information on the Enso language
  server, its protocol, and how it integrates with the runtime.
- [**Polyglot:**](./polyglot) Information on Enso's polyglot functionality, and
  how it is integrated into the surface Enso language.
- [**RFCs:**](./rfcs) RFCs for Enso's development and evolution.
- [**Runtime:**](./runtime) Specification and documentation of the way that the
  Enso runtime is designed and implemented.
- [**Semantics:**](./semantics) A specification of Enso's semantics.
- [**Style Guides:**](./style-guide) Style guides for the code written as part
  of the Enso project.
- [**Syntax:**](./syntax) A specification of Enso's syntax.
- [**Types:**](./types) A specification of Enso's type system and type theory.
- [**Debugger:**](./debugger) A specification of Enso's debugger.
- [**Parser:**](./parser) Design and specification of the Enso parser.
- [**Infrastructure:**](./infrastructure) Description of the infrastructure for
  building Enso.
- [**Libraries:**](./libraries) Description of Enso's Library Ecosystem.
