docs/runtime-guide.md, before:

---
layout: developer-doc
title: Runtime Guide
category: summary
tags: [contributing, guide, graal, truffle]
order: 7
---

# Runtime Guide

## GraalVM and Truffle

### Papers

1. [One VM To Rule Them All](http://lafo.ssw.uni-linz.ac.at/papers/2013_Onward_OneVMToRuleThemAll.pdf)
   a high-level overview of what GraalVM is and how it works.
2. [Practical Partial Evaluation for High-Performance Dynamic Language Runtimes](https://chrisseaton.com/rubytruffle/pldi17-truffle/pldi17-truffle.pdf)
   an introduction to basic Truffle concepts, including Polymorphic Inline
   Caches and other frequently used techniques.
3. [Fast, Flexible, Polyglot Instrumentation Support for Debuggers and other Tools](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.10201.pdf)
   an introduction to Truffle instrumentation framework – this is what Enso's
   runtime server for the IDE uses.
4. [Cross-Language Interoperability in a Multi-Language Runtime](https://chrisseaton.com/truffleruby/cross-language-interop.pdf)
   an introduction to how Truffle cross-language interop works.
5. [The whole list of publications](https://www.graalvm.org/community/publications/)
   because something may be useful at some point.

### Tutorials

1. [The list of Truffle docs on specific topics](https://github.com/oracle/graal/tree/master/truffle/docs)
   Certain more advanced topics are covered in these, use as needed.
   1. [Optimizing Tutorial](https://github.com/oracle/graal/blob/master/truffle/docs/Optimizing.md)
      you'll want to read this one for sure.
   2. [TruffleLibrary Tutorial](https://github.com/oracle/graal/blob/master/truffle/docs/TruffleLibraries.md)
      this is an important architectural concept for building Truffle
      interpreters. We wish we knew about this sooner and we recommend you
      structure the interpreter around this in the future.
2. [A tutorial on building a LISP in Truffle](https://cesquivias.github.io/blog/2015/01/15/writing-a-language-in-truffle-part-4-adding-features-the-truffle-way/)
   It's a 4-part tutorial, linked is part 4, start with part 2 (part 1 is not
   about Truffle). This one is important, even though it is old and uses stale
   APIs – it will still highlight the most important concepts, in particular the
   way Enso deals with lexical scopes and Tail Call Optimization.
3. [Simple Language](https://github.com/graalvm/simplelanguage) this is an
   implementation of a very simple toy language. Read it for basic understanding
   of simple Truffle concepts.

### Tips and Tricks

1. Familiarize yourself with
   [IGV](https://www.graalvm.org/graalvm-as-a-platform/language-implementation-framework/Profiling/).
   It's a horrible tool. It's clunky, ugly, and painful to use. It has also
   saved us more times than we can count, definitely worth investing the time to
   understand it. Download
   [Enso Language Support for IGV](../tools/enso4igv/README.md). Use
   [this tutorial](https://shopify.engineering/understanding-programs-using-graphs)
   (and
   [the follow up post](https://chrisseaton.com/truffleruby/basic-truffle-graphs/))
   to familiarize yourself with the representation.
2. Use our sbt
   [`withDebug`](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/project/WithDebugCommand.scala)
   utility. Familiarize yourself with the different otpions. It is a useful
   helper for running your programs and microbenchmarks with different Truffle
   debugging options.
3. Use [hsdis](https://github.com/liuzhengyang/hsdis/) for printing the
   generated assembly – you can often spot obvious problems with compilations.
   That being said, IGV (with
   [Enso Language Support](../tools/enso4igv/README.md)) is usually the better
   tool, if you take a look at the later compilation stages.
4. Pay attention to making things `final` and `@CompilationFinal`. This is the
   most important way Graal does constant-folding. Whenever a loop bound can be
   compilation final, take advantage (and use `@ExplodeLoop`).
5. Read the generated code for the nodes generated by the DSL. Learning the DSL
   is quite difficult and the documentation is sorely lacking. It is best to
   experiment with different kinds of `@Specialization` and read the generated
   code. Without this understanding, it's way too easy to introduce very subtle
   bugs to the language semantics.
6. Join the [GraalVM Slack server](https://www.graalvm.org/slack-invitation/).
   All the authors are there and they will happily help and answer any
   questions.
7. Be aware that Truffle Instrumentation is more constrained than it could be,
   because it wants to be language agnostic. The Enso runtime server is
   Enso-specific and therefore you may be better served in the future by rolling
   your own instrumentation. Read the instrumentation sources, it will help you
   understand how non-magical it actually is.
8. Clone the sources of Truffle and TruffleRuby. Set them up as projects in your
   IDE. Read the code when in doubt. Truffle documentation is really lacking
   sometimes, even though it is improving.
9. Understand the boundary between the language-side APIs (see e.g.
   `InteropLibrary`) and embedder side (see `Value`). You want to make sure you
   use the proper APIs in the proper places in the codebase. As a rule of thumb:
   all code in the `runtime` project is language/instrumentation-side. All code
   elsewhere is embedder-side. In particular, the only Graal dependency in
   embedder code should be `graal-sdk`. If you find yourself pulling things like
   `truffle-api`, you've done something wrong. Similarly, if you ever import
   anything from `org.graalvm.polyglot` in the language code, you're doing
   something wrong.

## Code & Internal Documentation Map

Other than the subsections here, go through the
[existing documentation](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/docs).

### Entry Points

1. See `Main` in `engine-runner` and `Language` in `runtime`. The former is the
   embedder-side entry point, the latter the language-side one. They do a bit of
   ping-pong through the polyglot APIs. That is unfortunate, as this API is
   stringly typed. Therefore, chase the usages of method-name constants to jump
   between the language-side implementations and the embedder-side calls.
   Alternatively, step through the flow in a debugger.
2. Look at the `MainModule` in `language-server` and `RuntimeServerInstrument`
   in `runtime`. This is the entry point for IDE, with language/embedder
   boundary as usual, but with a server-like message exchange instead of
   polyglot API use.

### Compiler

Look at `Compiler` in `runtime`. It is the main compiler class and the flow
should be straightforward. A high level overview is: the compiler alternates
between running module-local passes (currently in 3 groups) and global join
points, where information flows between modules.

### Interpreter

There are a few very convoluted spots in the interpreter, with non-trivial
design choices. Here's a list with some explanations:

1. **Function Call Flow**: It is quite difficult to efficiently call an Enso
   function. Enso allows passing arguments by name, supports currying and
   eta-expansion, and defaulted argument values. It also has to deal with
   polyglot method calls. And it has to be instrumentable, to enable the "enter
   a method via call site" functionality of the IDE. Start reading from
   `ApplicationNode` and follow the execute methods (or `@Specialization`s).
   There's a lot of them, but don't get too scared. It is also outlined
   [here](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/docs/runtime/function-call-flow.md).
2. **Polyglot Code**: While for some languages (Java, Ruby and Python) it is
   straightforward and very Truffle-like, for others (JS and R) it becomes
   tricky. The reason is that Truffle places strong limitations on threading in
   these languages and it is impossible to call JS and R from a multithreaded
   language context (like Enso's). For this reason, we have a special, internal
   sub-language, running on 2 separate Truffle contexts, exposing the single
   threaded languages in a safe way (through a GIL). The language is called EPB
   (Enso Polyglot Bridge) and lives in
   [this subtree](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/engine/runtime/src/main/java/org/enso/interpreter/epb).
   To really understand it, you'll need to familiarize yourself with what a
   [TruffleContext](https://www.graalvm.org/truffle/javadoc/com/oracle/truffle/api/TruffleContext.html)
   is and how it relates to polyglot and language contexts (oh, and also get
   ready to work with about 7 different meanings of the word `Context`...).
3. **Threading & Safepoints**: Enso has its own safepointing system and a thread
   manager. The job of the thread manager is to halt all the executing threads
   when needed. Safepoints are polled during normal code execution (usually at
   the start of every non-inlined method call and at each iteration of a TCO
   loop). See
   [the source](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/engine/runtime/src/main/java/org/enso/interpreter/runtime/ThreadManager.java).
4. **Resource Finalization**: Enso exposes a system for automatic resource
   finalization. This is non-trivial on the JVM and is handled in the
   [ResourceManager](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/engine/runtime/src/main/java/org/enso/interpreter/runtime/ResourceManager.java).
5. **Builtin Definitions**: Certain basic functions and types are exposed
   directly from the interpreter. They currently are all bundled in a virtual
   module called `Standard.Builtins`. See
   [the Builtins class](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/engine/runtime/src/main/java/org/enso/interpreter/runtime/builtin/Builtins.java)
   to see how that module is constructed. There's also a java-side
   annotation-driven DSL for automatic generation of builtin method boilerplate.
   See nodes in
   [this tree](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/engine/runtime/src/main/java/org/enso/interpreter/runtime/builtin)
   to get an idea of how it works. Also
   [read the doc](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/docs/runtime/builtin-base-methods.md)
6. **Standard Library Sources**: These are very non-magical – just plain old
   Enso projects that get shipped with every compiler release. They live
   [in this tree](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/distribution/lib/Standard).
   And are tested through
   [these projects](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/test). It also
   makes heavy use of host interop. The Java methods used by the standard
   library are located in
   [this directory](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/std-bits).
7. **Microbenchmarks**: There are some microbenchmarks for tiny Enso programs
   for basic language constructs. They are located in
   [this directory](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/engine/runtime/src/bench).
   They can be run through `sbt runtime/bench`. Each run will generate (or
   append to) the `bench-report.xml` file. It will also fail the benchmark suite
   if any benchmark is more than 20% slower than the fastest recorded run. Don't
   use your computer when running these. It is also worth noting that these can
   be run through the `withDebug` utility, which allows you to test truffle
   compilations (and e.g. watch the graphs in IGV with
   [Enso Language Support](../tools/enso4igv/README.md)).
8. **Tests**: There are scalatests that comprehensively test all of the language
   semantics and compiler passes. These are run with `sbt runtime/test`. For
   newer functionalities, we prefer adding tests to the `Tests` project in the
   standard library test. At this point, Enso is mature enough to self-test.

### Language Server

Talk to Dmitry! He's the main maintainer of this part.

Commit message:

Move logic calculating the index in Vector.at to a builtin method to make the performance of Vector to be on par with Array (#3811)
The main culprit of a Vector slowdown (when compared to Array) was the normalization of the index when accessing the elements. Turns out that the Graal was very persistent on **not** inlining that particular fragment and that was degrading the results in benchmarks.

Being unable to force it to do it (looks like a combination of thunk execution and another layer of indirection) we resorted to just moving the normalization to the builtin method. That makes Array and Vector perform roughly the same.

Moved all handling of invalid index into the builtin as well, simplifying the Enso implementation. This also meant that `Vector.unsafe_at` is now obsolete.
Additionally, added support for negative indices in Array, to behave in the same way as for Vector.

# Important Notes
Note that this workaround only addresses this particular perf issue. I'm pretty sure we will have more of such scenarios.
Before the change `averageOverVector` benchmark averaged around `0.033 ms/op` now it does consistently `0.016 ms/op`, similarly to `averageOverArray`.

docs/runtime-guide.md, after:

---
layout: developer-doc
title: Runtime Guide
category: summary
tags: [contributing, guide, graal, truffle]
order: 7
---

# Runtime Guide

## GraalVM and Truffle

### Papers

1. [One VM To Rule Them All](http://lafo.ssw.uni-linz.ac.at/papers/2013_Onward_OneVMToRuleThemAll.pdf)
   a high-level overview of what GraalVM is and how it works.
2. [Practical Partial Evaluation for High-Performance Dynamic Language Runtimes](https://chrisseaton.com/rubytruffle/pldi17-truffle/pldi17-truffle.pdf)
   an introduction to basic Truffle concepts, including Polymorphic Inline
   Caches and other frequently used techniques.
3. [Fast, Flexible, Polyglot Instrumentation Support for Debuggers and other Tools](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.10201.pdf)
   an introduction to Truffle instrumentation framework – this is what Enso's
   runtime server for the IDE uses.
4. [Cross-Language Interoperability in a Multi-Language Runtime](https://chrisseaton.com/truffleruby/cross-language-interop.pdf)
   an introduction to how Truffle cross-language interop works.
5. [The whole list of publications](https://www.graalvm.org/community/publications/)
   because something may be useful at some point.

### Tutorials

1. [The list of Truffle docs on specific topics](https://github.com/oracle/graal/tree/master/truffle/docs)
   Certain more advanced topics are covered in these, use as needed.
   1. [Optimizing Tutorial](https://github.com/oracle/graal/blob/master/truffle/docs/Optimizing.md)
      you'll want to read this one for sure.
   2. [TruffleLibrary Tutorial](https://github.com/oracle/graal/blob/master/truffle/docs/TruffleLibraries.md)
      this is an important architectural concept for building Truffle
      interpreters. We wish we knew about this sooner and we recommend you
      structure the interpreter around this in the future.
2. [A tutorial on building a LISP in Truffle](https://cesquivias.github.io/blog/2015/01/15/writing-a-language-in-truffle-part-4-adding-features-the-truffle-way/)
   It's a 4-part tutorial, linked is part 4, start with part 2 (part 1 is not
   about Truffle). This one is important, even though it is old and uses stale
   APIs – it will still highlight the most important concepts, in particular the
   way Enso deals with lexical scopes and Tail Call Optimization.
3. [Simple Language](https://github.com/graalvm/simplelanguage) this is an
   implementation of a very simple toy language. Read it for basic understanding
   of simple Truffle concepts.

### Tips and Tricks

1. Familiarize yourself with
   [IGV](https://www.graalvm.org/graalvm-as-a-platform/language-implementation-framework/Profiling/).
   It's a horrible tool. It's clunky, ugly, and painful to use. It has also
   saved us more times than we can count, definitely worth investing the time to
   understand it. Download
   [Enso Language Support for IGV](../tools/enso4igv/README.md). Use
   [this tutorial](https://shopify.engineering/understanding-programs-using-graphs)
   (and
   [the follow up post](https://chrisseaton.com/truffleruby/basic-truffle-graphs/))
   to familiarize yourself with the representation.
2. Use our sbt
   [`withDebug`](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/project/WithDebugCommand.scala)
   utility. Familiarize yourself with the different otpions. It is a useful
   helper for running your programs and microbenchmarks with different Truffle
   debugging options.
3. Use [hsdis](https://github.com/liuzhengyang/hsdis/) for printing the
   generated assembly – you can often spot obvious problems with compilations.
   That being said, IGV (with
   [Enso Language Support](../tools/enso4igv/README.md)) is usually the better
   tool, if you take a look at the later compilation stages.
4. Pay attention to making things `final` and `@CompilationFinal`. This is the
   most important way Graal does constant-folding. Whenever a loop bound can be
   compilation final, take advantage (and use `@ExplodeLoop`).
5. Read the generated code for the nodes generated by the DSL. Learning the DSL
   is quite difficult and the documentation is sorely lacking. It is best to
   experiment with different kinds of `@Specialization` and read the generated
   code. Without this understanding, it's way too easy to introduce very subtle
   bugs to the language semantics.
6. Join the [GraalVM Slack server](https://www.graalvm.org/slack-invitation/).
   All the authors are there and they will happily help and answer any
   questions.
7. Be aware that Truffle Instrumentation is more constrained than it could be,
   because it wants to be language agnostic. The Enso runtime server is
   Enso-specific and therefore you may be better served in the future by rolling
   your own instrumentation. Read the instrumentation sources, it will help you
   understand how non-magical it actually is.
8. Clone the sources of Truffle and TruffleRuby. Set them up as projects in your
   IDE. Read the code when in doubt. Truffle documentation is really lacking
   sometimes, even though it is improving.
9. Understand the boundary between the language-side APIs (see e.g.
   `InteropLibrary`) and embedder side (see `Value`). You want to make sure you
   use the proper APIs in the proper places in the codebase. As a rule of thumb:
   all code in the `runtime` project is language/instrumentation-side. All code
   elsewhere is embedder-side. In particular, the only Graal dependency in
   embedder code should be `graal-sdk`. If you find yourself pulling things like
   `truffle-api`, you've done something wrong. Similarly, if you ever import
   anything from `org.graalvm.polyglot` in the language code, you're doing
   something wrong.
10. Avoid
    [deoptimizations](https://www.graalvm.org/22.2/graalvm-as-a-platform/language-implementation-framework/Optimizing/#debugging-deoptimizations).
    Understanding IGV graphs can be a very time-consuming and complex process.
    Sometimes it is sufficient to only look at the compilation traces to
    discover repeated or unnecessary deoptimizations which can significantly
    affect overall performance of your program. You can tell runner to generate
    compilation traces via additional options:
    ```
    JAVA_OPTS="-Dpolygot.engine.TracePerformanceWarnings=all -Dpolyglot.engine.TraceTransferToInterpreter=true -Dpolyglot.engine.TraceDeoptimizeFrame=true -Dpolyglot.engine.TraceCompilation=true -Dpolyglot.engine.TraceCompilationDetails=true"
    ```
    Make sure you print trace logs by using `--log-level TRACE`.
11. Occasionally a piece of code runs slower than we anticipated. Analyzing
    Truffle inlining traces may reveal locations that one thought would be
    inlined but Truffle decided otherwise. Rewriting such locations to builtin
    methods or more inliner-friendly representation can significantly improve
    the performance. You can tell runner to generate inlining traces via
    additional options:
    ```
    JAVA_OPTS="-Dpolyglot.engine.TraceInlining=true -Dpolyglot.engine.TraceInliningDetails=true"
    ```
    Make sure you print trace logs by using `--log-level TRACE`. See
    [documentation](https://www.graalvm.org/22.2/graalvm-as-a-platform/language-implementation-framework/Inlining/#call-tree-states)
    for the explanation of inlining decisions.

## Code & Internal Documentation Map

Other than the subsections here, go through the
[existing documentation](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/docs).

### Entry Points

1. See `Main` in `engine-runner` and `Language` in `runtime`. The former is the
   embedder-side entry point, the latter the language-side one. They do a bit of
   ping-pong through the polyglot APIs. That is unfortunate, as this API is
   stringly typed. Therefore, chase the usages of method-name constants to jump
   between the language-side implementations and the embedder-side calls.
   Alternatively, step through the flow in a debugger.
2. Look at the `MainModule` in `language-server` and `RuntimeServerInstrument`
   in `runtime`. This is the entry point for IDE, with language/embedder
   boundary as usual, but with a server-like message exchange instead of
   polyglot API use.

### Compiler

Look at `Compiler` in `runtime`. It is the main compiler class and the flow
should be straightforward. A high level overview is: the compiler alternates
between running module-local passes (currently in 3 groups) and global join
points, where information flows between modules.

### Interpreter

There are a few very convoluted spots in the interpreter, with non-trivial
design choices. Here's a list with some explanations:

1. **Function Call Flow**: It is quite difficult to efficiently call an Enso
   function. Enso allows passing arguments by name, supports currying and
   eta-expansion, and defaulted argument values. It also has to deal with
   polyglot method calls. And it has to be instrumentable, to enable the "enter
   a method via call site" functionality of the IDE. Start reading from
   `ApplicationNode` and follow the execute methods (or `@Specialization`s).
   There's a lot of them, but don't get too scared. It is also outlined
   [here](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/docs/runtime/function-call-flow.md).
2. **Polyglot Code**: While for some languages (Java, Ruby and Python) it is
   straightforward and very Truffle-like, for others (JS and R) it becomes
   tricky. The reason is that Truffle places strong limitations on threading in
   these languages and it is impossible to call JS and R from a multithreaded
   language context (like Enso's). For this reason, we have a special, internal
   sub-language, running on 2 separate Truffle contexts, exposing the single
   threaded languages in a safe way (through a GIL). The language is called EPB
   (Enso Polyglot Bridge) and lives in
   [this subtree](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/engine/runtime/src/main/java/org/enso/interpreter/epb).
   To really understand it, you'll need to familiarize yourself with what a
   [TruffleContext](https://www.graalvm.org/truffle/javadoc/com/oracle/truffle/api/TruffleContext.html)
   is and how it relates to polyglot and language contexts (oh, and also get
   ready to work with about 7 different meanings of the word `Context`...).
3. **Threading & Safepoints**: Enso has its own safepointing system and a thread
   manager. The job of the thread manager is to halt all the executing threads
   when needed. Safepoints are polled during normal code execution (usually at
   the start of every non-inlined method call and at each iteration of a TCO
   loop). See
   [the source](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/engine/runtime/src/main/java/org/enso/interpreter/runtime/ThreadManager.java).
4. **Resource Finalization**: Enso exposes a system for automatic resource
   finalization. This is non-trivial on the JVM and is handled in the
   [ResourceManager](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/engine/runtime/src/main/java/org/enso/interpreter/runtime/ResourceManager.java).
5. **Builtin Definitions**: Certain basic functions and types are exposed
   directly from the interpreter. They currently are all bundled in a virtual
   module called `Standard.Builtins`. See
   [the Builtins class](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/engine/runtime/src/main/java/org/enso/interpreter/runtime/builtin/Builtins.java)
   to see how that module is constructed. There's also a java-side
   annotation-driven DSL for automatic generation of builtin method boilerplate.
   See nodes in
   [this tree](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/engine/runtime/src/main/java/org/enso/interpreter/runtime/builtin)
   to get an idea of how it works. Also
   [read the doc](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/develop/docs/runtime/builtin-base-methods.md)
6. **Standard Library Sources**: These are very non-magical – just plain old
   Enso projects that get shipped with every compiler release. They live
   [in this tree](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/distribution/lib/Standard).
   And are tested through
   [these projects](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/test). It also
   makes heavy use of host interop. The Java methods used by the standard
   library are located in
   [this directory](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/std-bits).
7. **Microbenchmarks**: There are some microbenchmarks for tiny Enso programs
   for basic language constructs. They are located in
   [this directory](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/tree/develop/engine/runtime/src/bench).
   They can be run through `sbt runtime/bench`. Each run will generate (or
   append to) the `bench-report.xml` file. It will also fail the benchmark suite
   if any benchmark is more than 20% slower than the fastest recorded run. Don't
   use your computer when running these. It is also worth noting that these can
   be run through the `withDebug` utility, which allows you to test truffle
   compilations (and e.g. watch the graphs in IGV with
   [Enso Language Support](../tools/enso4igv/README.md)).
8. **Tests**: There are scalatests that comprehensively test all of the language
   semantics and compiler passes. These are run with `sbt runtime/test`. For
   newer functionalities, we prefer adding tests to the `Tests` project in the
   standard library test. At this point, Enso is mature enough to self-test.

### Language Server

Talk to Dmitry! He's the main maintainer of this part.
