docs/infrastructure/benchmarks.md, before:

# Benchmarks

In this document, we describe the benchmark types used for the runtime - Engine
micro benchmarks in the section
[Engine JMH microbenchmarks](#engine-jmh-microbenchmarks) and standard library
benchmarks in the section
[Standard library benchmarks](#standard-library-benchmarks), and how and where
are the results stored and visualized in the section
[Visualization](#visualization).

To track the performance of the engine, we use
[JMH](https://openjdk.org/projects/code-tools/jmh/). There are two types of
benchmarks:

- [micro benchmarks](#engine-jmh-microbenchmarks) located directly in the
  `runtime` SBT project. These benchmarks are written in Java, and are used to
  measure the performance of specific parts of the engine.
- [standard library benchmarks](#standard-library-benchmarks) located in the
  `test/Benchmarks` Enso project. These benchmarks are entirelly written in
  Enso, along with the harness code.

## Engine JMH microbenchmarks

These benchmarks are written in Java and are used to measure the performance of
specific parts of the engine. The sources are located in the `runtime` SBT
project, under `src/bench` source directory.

### Running the benchmarks

To run the benchmarks, use `bench` or `benchOnly` command - `bench` runs all the
benchmarks and `benchOnly` runs only one benchmark specified with the fully
qualified name. The parameters for these benchmarks are hard-coded inside the
JMH annotations in the source files. In order to change, e.g., the number of
measurement iterations, you need to modify the parameter to the `@Measurement`
annotation.

### Debugging the benchmarks

Currently, the best way to debug the benchmark is to set the `@Fork` annotation
to 0, and to run `withDebug` command like this:

```
withDebug --debugger benchOnly -- <fully qualified benchmark name>
```

## Standard library benchmarks

Unlike the Engine micro benchmarks, these benchmarks are written entirely in
Enso and located in the `test/Benchmarks` Enso project. There are two ways to
run these benchmarks:

- [Running standalone](#running-standalone)
- [Running via JMH launcher](#running-via-jmh-launcher)

### Running standalone

A single source file in the project may contain multiple benchmark definitions.
If the source file defines `main` method, we can evaluate it the same way as any
other Enso source file, for example via
`runEngineDistribution --in-project test/Benchmarks --run <source file>`. The
harness within the project is not meant for any sophisticated benchmarking, but
rather for quick local evaluation. See the `Bench.measure` method documentation
for more details. For more sophisticated approach, run the benchmarks via the
JMH launcher.

### Running via JMH launcher

The JMH launcher is located in `std-bits/benchmarks` directory, as
`std-benchmarks` SBT project. It is a single Java class with a `main` method
that just delegates to the
[standard JMH launcher](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/Main.java),
therefore, supports all the command line options as the standard launcher. For
the full options summary, either see the
[JMH source code](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/runner/options/CommandLineOptions.java),
or run the launcher with `-h` option.

The `std-benchmarks` SBT project supports `bench` and `benchOnly` commands, that
work the same as in the `runtime` project, with the exception that the benchmark
name does not have to be specified as a fully qualified name, but as a regular
expression. To access the full flexibility of the JMH launcher, run it via
`Bench/run` - for example, to see the help message: `Bench/run -h`. For example,
you can run all the benchmarks that have "New_Vector" in their name with just 3
seconds for warmup iterations and 2 measurement iterations with
`Bench/run -w 3 -i 2 New_Vector`.

Whenever you add or delete any benchmarks from `test/Benchmarks` project, the
generated JMH sources need to be recompiled with `Bench/clean; Bench/compile`.
You do not need to recompile the `std-benchmarks` project if you only modify the
benchmark sources.

## Visualization

The benchmarks are invoked as a daily
[GitHub Action](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/actions/workflows/benchmark.yml),
that can be invoked manually on a specific branch as well. The results are kept
in the artifacts produced from the actions. In
`tools/performance/engine-benchmarks` directory, there is a simple Python script
for collecting and processing the results. See the
[README in that directory](../../tools/performance/engine-benchmarks/README.md)
for more information about how to run that script. This script is invoked
regularly on a private machine and the results are published in
[https://enso-org.github.io/engine-benchmark-results/](https://enso-org.github.io/engine-benchmark-results/).

Commit message:

Compare performance of Panic / Java Exception / Dataflow error (#8130)
After a discussion, I was really curious that our panics are supposed to be almost free - and while trusting that statement, it was really hard to believe - so I wanted to see for myself - knowing that an experiment is the most robust source of this kind of information - testing that in practice.

So I wrote a benchmark comparing various ways of reporting errors, also testing them both at 'shallow' and 'deep' stack traces (adding 200 additional frames) - to see how stack depth affects them, if at all.

The panics are indeed blazing fast! Kudos to the engine team. However, it seems that our dataflow errors are relatively slow (and we tend to use them _more_ than panics and want to be using them more and more). This uncovers a possible optimization opportunity. Can we make them as fast as panics??

Analysis of the benchmark results in comment below.

docs/infrastructure/benchmarks.md, after:

# Benchmarks

In this document, we describe the benchmark types used for the runtime - Engine
micro benchmarks in the section
[Engine JMH microbenchmarks](#engine-jmh-microbenchmarks) and standard library
benchmarks in the section
[Standard library benchmarks](#standard-library-benchmarks), and how and where
are the results stored and visualized in the section
[Visualization](#visualization).

To track the performance of the engine, we use
[JMH](https://openjdk.org/projects/code-tools/jmh/). There are two types of
benchmarks:

- [micro benchmarks](#engine-jmh-microbenchmarks) located directly in the
  `runtime` SBT project. These benchmarks are written in Java, and are used to
  measure the performance of specific parts of the engine.
- [standard library benchmarks](#standard-library-benchmarks) located in the
  `test/Benchmarks` Enso project. These benchmarks are entirelly written in
  Enso, along with the harness code.

## Engine JMH microbenchmarks

These benchmarks are written in Java and are used to measure the performance of
specific parts of the engine. The sources are located in the `runtime` SBT
project, under `src/bench` source directory.

### Running the benchmarks

To run the benchmarks, use `bench` or `benchOnly` command - `bench` runs all the
benchmarks and `benchOnly` runs only one benchmark specified with the fully
qualified name. The parameters for these benchmarks are hard-coded inside the
JMH annotations in the source files. In order to change, e.g., the number of
measurement iterations, you need to modify the parameter to the `@Measurement`
annotation.

### Debugging the benchmarks

Currently, the best way to debug the benchmark is to set the `@Fork` annotation
to 0, and to run `withDebug` command like this:

```
withDebug --debugger benchOnly -- <fully qualified benchmark name>
```

## Standard library benchmarks

Unlike the Engine micro benchmarks, these benchmarks are written entirely in
Enso and located in the `test/Benchmarks` Enso project. There are two ways to
run these benchmarks:

- [Running standalone](#running-standalone)
- [Running via JMH launcher](#running-via-jmh-launcher)

Note that to avoid inflating the run-time of the std-lib benchmarks on the CI,
some extra benchmarks (which are not measuring important functionality, but may
serve as a baseline when trying to understand performance of similar scenarios)
are disabled by default. To enable them, set the `ENSO_ENABLE_EXTRA_BENCHMARKS`
environment variable before running any benchmarks.

### Running standalone

A single source file in the project may contain multiple benchmark definitions.
If the source file defines `main` method, we can evaluate it the same way as any
other Enso source file, for example via
`runEngineDistribution --in-project test/Benchmarks --run <source file>`. The
harness within the project is not meant for any sophisticated benchmarking, but
rather for quick local evaluation. See the `Bench.measure` method documentation
for more details. For more sophisticated approach, run the benchmarks via the
JMH launcher.

### Running via JMH launcher

The JMH launcher is located in `std-bits/benchmarks` directory, as
`std-benchmarks` SBT project. It is a single Java class with a `main` method
that just delegates to the
[standard JMH launcher](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/Main.java),
therefore, supports all the command line options as the standard launcher. For
the full options summary, either see the
[JMH source code](https://github.com/openjdk/jmh/blob/master/jmh-core/src/main/java/org/openjdk/jmh/runner/options/CommandLineOptions.java),
or run the launcher with `-h` option.

The `std-benchmarks` SBT project supports `bench` and `benchOnly` commands, that
work the same as in the `runtime` project, with the exception that the benchmark
name does not have to be specified as a fully qualified name, but as a regular
expression. To access the full flexibility of the JMH launcher, run it via
`Bench/run` - for example, to see the help message: `Bench/run -h`. For example,
you can run all the benchmarks that have "New_Vector" in their name with just 3
seconds for warmup iterations and 2 measurement iterations with
`Bench/run -w 3 -i 2 New_Vector`.

Whenever you add or delete any benchmarks from `test/Benchmarks` project, the
generated JMH sources need to be recompiled with `Bench/clean; Bench/compile`.
You do not need to recompile the `std-benchmarks` project if you only modify the
benchmark sources.

## Visualization

The benchmarks are invoked as a daily
[GitHub Action](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/actions/workflows/benchmark.yml),
that can be invoked manually on a specific branch as well. The results are kept
in the artifacts produced from the actions. In
`tools/performance/engine-benchmarks` directory, there is a simple Python script
for collecting and processing the results. See the
[README in that directory](../../tools/performance/engine-benchmarks/README.md)
for more information about how to run that script. This script is invoked
regularly on a private machine and the results are published in
[https://enso-org.github.io/engine-benchmark-results/](https://enso-org.github.io/engine-benchmark-results/).
