docs/infrastructure/README.md, before:

---
layout: section-summary
title: Infrastructure
category: infrastructure
tags: [infrastructure, readme]
order: 0
---

# Infrastructure

The Enso runtime runs on the GraalVM which is a version of the JVM. This folder
contains all documentation pertaining to Enso's infrastructure, which is broken
up as follows:

- [**sbt:**](sbt.md) The build tools that are used for building the project.
- [**Java 11:**](java-11.md) Description of changes related to the Java 11
  migration.
- [**Native Image:**](native-image.md) Description of the Native Image build
  used for building the launcher native binary.
- [**Rust:**](rust.md) Description of integration of the Scala project with the
  Rust components.
- [**Upgrading GraalVM:**](upgrading-graalvm.md) Description of steps that have
  to be performed by each developer when the project is upgraded to a new
  version of GraalVM.
- [**Logging**:](logging.md) Description of an unified and centralized logging
  infrastructure that should be used by all components.

Commit message:

Invoke all Enso benchmarks via JMH (#7101)
# Important Notes
#### The Plot

- there used to be two kinds of benchmarks: in Java and in Enso
- those in Java got quite a good treatment
- there even are results updated daily: https://enso-org.github.io/engine-benchmark-results/
- the benchmarks written in Enso used to be 2nd class citizen

#### The Revelation
This PR has the potential to fix it all!
- It designs new [Bench API](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/pull/7101/commits/88fd6fb9888d939c2d9745a7397f6e87dec4fa4d) ready for non-batch execution
- It allows for _single benchmark in a dedicated JVM_ execution
- It provides a simple way to wrap such an Enso benchmark as a Java benchmark
- thus the results of Enso and Java benchmarks are [now unified](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/pull/7101#discussion_r1257504440)

Long live _single benchmarking infrastructure for Java and Enso_!

docs/infrastructure/README.md, after:

---
layout: section-summary
title: Infrastructure
category: infrastructure
tags: [infrastructure, readme]
order: 0
---

# Infrastructure

The Enso runtime runs on the GraalVM which is a version of the JVM. This folder
contains all documentation pertaining to Enso's infrastructure, which is broken
up as follows:

- [**sbt:**](sbt.md) The build tools that are used for building the project.
- [**Java 11:**](java-11.md) Description of changes related to the Java 11
  migration.
- [**Native Image:**](native-image.md) Description of the Native Image build
  used for building the launcher native binary.
- [**Rust:**](rust.md) Description of integration of the Scala project with the
  Rust components.
- [**Upgrading GraalVM:**](upgrading-graalvm.md) Description of steps that have
  to be performed by each developer when the project is upgraded to a new
  version of GraalVM.
- [**Benchmarks:**](benchmarks.md) Description of the benchmarking
  infrastructure used for measuring performance of the runtime.
- [**Logging**:](logging.md) Description of an unified and centralized logging
  infrastructure that should be used by all components.
